 A spokeswoman for Lyft said: "Every day, more and more people choose Lyft because they believe ethics matter, service matters and they value a great experience. We are proud of the progress we've made but will never stop working to win the U.S. market." This accounting of Lyft's history is based on interviews with two dozen current and former Lyft and Uber employees, executives, investors and others in the field. To expand its business in the meantime, Lyft is preparing to offer a new type of shared ride that is higher priced than Lyft Line-in which the car picks up multiple passengers going in roughly the same direction-but still cheaper than the "Classic" private ride. Separately, Lyft wants to develop a cheaper ride than Lyft Line. The Lyft project is led by Jon McNeill, a former Tesla executive who Lyft recently hired as chief operating officer. After preliminary discussions with Lyft's founders about a merger in which Lyft shareholders might get somewhere around 10% of Uber's paper valuation, Mr. Kalanick proposed a face-to-face meeting. The terms of the Lyft stake were roughly similar to the prior offer, but one big sticking point was around the Lyft co-founders' role at Uber, including whether they would lose their potential "Earnouts," or future stock awards, if they were "Fired for cause." Mr. VanderZanden appeared to be disappointed about the missed opportunity, said one person who spoke to him at the time. The company spent nine months designing a shared-ride service called Lyft Line, offering much lower fares, which Lyft hoped would attract a much bigger audience. So Mr. Kalanick raced to publish a blog post about an identical service, UberPool, that was in "Private beta"-in other words, not close to being released-before Lyft could unveil Lyft Line. Lyft couldn't figure out how Uber was able to launch the feature, and it took Lyft five months to catch up. With users defecting to Lyft en masse, Lyft took several weeks to turn off costly ads and promotions for riders.